# Psych-Final-Project
Jellyfish- Sea nettle 
Vanessa Locke (vanessa.locke001@umb.edu), Grelby Santos (grelby.santos001@umb.edu), Sandy Abirustom (sandy.abirustom001@umb.edu), Ryan Bulger (ryan.bulger001@umb.edu)
<br />
<br />
Evaluation of the effects of various chemicals on discharge of and pain caused by jellyfish nematocysts
<br />
Author links open overlay panelLaura M. Birsa, AbstractJellyfish tentacles in contact with human skin can produce pain swelling and redness. The pain is due to discharge of jellyfish nematocysts and associated toxins and discharge can be caused by a variety of mechanical and chemical stimuli. A series, Wahlgren, C.-F., Rifkin, J. F., Ramasamy, S., Burnett, J. W., Auerbach, P. S., Binshtok, A. M., & Cheng, D. (2010, January 29). Evaluation of the effects of various chemicals on discharge of and pain caused by jellyfish nematocysts. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part C: Toxicology & Pharmacology. Retrieved April 27, 2023, from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532045610000098 
<br />
The research presented intended to determine the chemicals that stimulate or inhibit nematocyst (stinging cells) discharge and whether or not they brought relief to testers who were exposed to the sting of jellyfish tentacles. A total of 8 chemicals were tested. This was done by stinging one of the authors and using the solutions on the injury with a day healing period. One arm was not treated while the other was for comparison. The research concluded that acetic acid, ethanol, ammonia and bromelain (meat tenderizer) contributed to immediate discharge of nematocysts. Lidocaine concluded to provide pain relief. The experiment included confounds of skin sensitivity, meaning the pain recorded can range for each person. The forearms also belong to the authors so there may be experimenter bias present. Because it was done over a 20 day period and no combinations of each solution, it did not present internal validity. I hypothesize that chemical compounds of vinegar react with nematocysts to activate them, causing increased pain sensations. 
<br />
<br />
Temperature, salinity and food effects on asexual reproduction and abundance of the scyphozoan Chrysaora quinquecirrha (sea nettle jellyfish)
<br />
Purcell , J. E., White , J. R., Nemazie , D. A., & Wright , D. A. (1999, May 3). Temperature, salinity and food effects on asexual reproduction and abundance of the scyphozoan Chrysaora quinquecirrha. Marine Ecology Progress Series . Retrieved April 27, 2023, from https://www.int-res.com/articles/meps/180/m180p187.pdf 
<br />
The research presented intends to study the combined effects of temperature and salinity on ephyra and polyp production. The researchers hypothesized that salinity and temperature would have a large impact on the asexual reproduction of the jellyfish. The experimenters compared the jellyfish in captivity being studied to sampling from jellies in their natural environment. It was concluded that ephyra and polyp production were low at salinities of 5, 30 and 35% and ephyra production increased with more food availability. Since all the species were taken from one location it proves no external validity. I hypothesize that light conditions can trigger strobilation in sea nettles, based on the proposed idea by the authors that changing light conditions would do that. 
<br />
<br />
Effects of predation by the scyphomedusae Chrysaora quinquecirrha on zooplankton populations in Chesapeake Bay, USA
<br />
Purcell , J. E. (1992, October 8). Effects of predation by the scyphomedusae Chrysaora quinquecirrha on zooplankton populations in Chesapeake Bay, USA. marine ecology progress series . Retrieved April 27, 2023, from chrome-extension://bdfcnmeidppjeaggnmidamkiddifkdib/viewer.html?file=https://www.int-res.com/articles/meps/87/m087p065.pdf 
<br />
The research presented intends to calculate predation rates on prey populations because it is believed that the Chrysaora quinecirrha (sea nettle jellyfish) are extremely important to the plankton dynamics of a bay area, as well as control the copepod populations. Overall the relationships between copepod density, medusa diameter and water temperature was tested The experiment included taking sample medusa’s and emptying their stomach of copepods through feeding them other prey and diameters recorded. While in captivity, copepod exoskeletons were examined to determine digestion rates. The study concluded that the sea nettle showed positive selection for only copepods and selected against bivalve veligers. Diet habitats depended on the bell diameter of the medusa. The study may have overestimated because the mean sizes collected for gut content were not average sizes for the general population, disproving external validity. Dates of the experiment were not included either, which could affect the predation rates, disproving internal validity. I hypothesize the size of the medusae affects the rate of predation as well as prey consumed. 
<br />
<br />
Swimming and feeding by the scyphomedusa Chrysaora quinquecirrha
<br />
Ford, M. D., Costello , J. H., Heidelberg , K. B., & Purcell , J. E. (1997, August). Swimming and feeding by the scyphomedusa Chrysaora quinquecirrha. Marine Biology . Retrieved April 27, 2023, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s002270050175 
<br />
The research presented intended to determine the relationship between swimming motions and prey encounter with capture surfaces. It’s thought that the bell shape, swimming motion and particle velocities are related. Medusa were collected for the experiment and video taped to map out swimming motions. Prey was dyed with fluorescein to trace the water motions around the swimming medusa. The bell diameter ranges from 0.8 to 8.0 cm in this sample as well as collected from two different sites. It was concluded that captures of prey were near the bell region and was in relevance to the jellyfish’s pulsation cycle in swimming. There were no observed differences in bell diameter and swimming velocity. The only critique I have is there was no information on particle movements in accordance with the bell diameter. Based on this research, I hypothesize the bell pulsation cycle does not rely on the diameter of the medusa.
<br />
<br />
Predicting the distribution of the scyphomedusa Chrysaora quinquecirrha in Chesapeake Bay
<br />
Decker , M. B., Brown, C. W., Hood, R. R., Purcell, J. E., Gross, T. F., Matanoski, J. C., Bannon , R. O., & Setzler-Hamilton , E. M. (2007, January 11). Predicting the distribution of the scyphomedusa Chrysaora quinquecirrha in Chesapeake Bay. Marine Ecology Progress Series . Retrieved April 27, 2023, from https://www.int-res.com/articles/meps2007/329/m329p099.pdf 
<br />
The research presented intended to understand the C. quinquecirrha medusa presence and abundance and how this species could potentially affect the energy flow in Chesapeake Bay. Lastly it aims to be able to predict blooms of this species in the future. It is proposed that the salinity and temperature of the water determines the distribution of the sea nettle jelly. The experiment included two habitat models, one predicting the likelihood of medusae occurring and the other predicting the potential concentration. According to sight counts of the species as well as tested water temperatures and salinity levels in the bay,  the models could be applied to a distribution map. The medusa were randomly selected as well as the dataset of their absence and presence. There was little internal validity in this experiment because it was mainly based on predictions, a capture and release method might do better to understand the living habits of these jellyfish. Based on the research, I hypothesize seasonal factors affect sea nettle distribution.  
<br />
<br />
Hypothesis Research design 
<br />
Previous research on the sea nettle jellyfish has brought up the question of strobilation and whether the rate and efficiency changes with various light conditions. To go about this question, I would choose a repeated measure design. This design allows for repeated measurements of an experimental unit. In order to ensure external validity, I would take sea nettle polyps from the different locations in which they reside. Keep them in separate tanks and expose each to a different light condition, keeping them all at the same water temperature and salinity. From observation the rate can be taken note of when the polyps go through asexual reproduction in their selective tanks. For a control specimen, one of the polyp tanks can be left in natural lighting, or observed through field experiments. I will be intervening with different light settings, but isolating only that variable and keeping all others the same. The polyps can be observed over the time span of a few days, then evaluating the resulting polyps in their health and survival abilities. In this context that means, has a fully developed digestive system, able to feed themselves properly, and longevity; jellyfish polyps live up to 1-3 years, in observing the health of the offspring of the experimental polyps, it would be crucial to look at these factors. To counterbalance the results of this research, it would be most effective to do this study a few times, as in once a polyp completes strobilation in a particular light condition, repeat the experiment with another polyp to ensure the results are correct. 
<br />
<br />
Ethics of Research Design
<br />
There are a few ethical regulations and restrictions involved in the studying and research of the sea nettle. These include that the sea nettle jellyfish in this experiment wouldn’t be harmed. The jellyfish would be in tanks with temperature and salinity they are comfortable with and would be fed properly (all the same to keep the experiment on track). The jellyfish would also be safely transferred for the experiment by net. The reason for the experiment is for knowledge on the sea nettle but could also pose beneficial to medical sciences. Thus, there is reason for the experiment and it is not thought of as reckless curiosity. Through checking the data a few times (and through repeat experiments) and getting peer reviewed, my experiment can avoid any issues of experimenter bias. To get the jellyfish for the experiment, I will ask the property owners of the bodies of water to mess with their ecosystem for a few days before returning the species back to their natural environment. This will likely happen through the state, and all federal, state, and local governmental regulations will be met. Through this request, it can be considered consent to use the jellyfish in the research experiment. The research results will be documented, reported and published with any references used, properly cited in APA format. 
